dovecot-mbc
===========

Dovecot plugin for executing a shell script on mailbox creation

Description
-----------
dovecot-mbc is a plugin for Dovecot, which can be used in order to let dovecot trigger a custom shell script, whenever a mailbox is created or renamed.
You could use this for instance in order to automatically set ACLs for new public mailboxes, send a welcome message or triggering anything else.

The shell script's location can be defined within the plugin's configuration.
The script itself is provided with the following environment variables at runtime:
- MBC_MAILBOX - mailbox name
- MBC_DIRECTORY - mailbox directory
- MBC_TYPE - mailbox namespace type (private/shared/public)
- MBC_PREFIX - mailbox namespace prefix
- MBC_INBOX - mailbox namespace is inbox (true/false)
- MBC_HIDDEN - mailbox namespace hidden flag (true/false)
- MBC_SUBSCRIPTIONS - mailbox namespace handles subscriptions (true/false)
- MBC_LIST - mailbox namespace is listed (yes/no/children)

However, be reminded that the namespace information is depending on the context.
If for example the mailbox is created by the LDA, it may describe a namespace as "private", which is described as "public" when triggered via IMAP with a user context.
So please take this into consideration when your script is triggered in multiple contexts.

License
-------
GPLv3 for my stuff. (Hooray for the FSF! Free Software means Free Society!)

For the notify-plugin.h file as well as for dovecot's configure.ac it's LGPLv2.1

Installation
------------
Installation of the plugin is essentially a 4-step process:

1) Install the following source files to the corresponding directory (e.g. /usr/include/dovecot)
   
   * dovecot-core
   * dovecot-common
   * dovecot-imapd

   Debian/Ubuntu users can use "apt-get source" for this purpose

2) Configure the paths in Makefile according to your installation
   The relevant variables are:

   * SCRIPT_GROUP - the system group of the main mail user/users
   * DOVECOT_INCDIR - directory containing dovecot header files
   * DOVECOT_MODULEDIR - directory where the plugin shall be installed
   * DOVECOT_ETCDIR - directory where dovecot.conf resides
   * DOVECOT_CONFIGDIR - dovecot's conf.d directory (or equivalent)
   * MAN1DIR - directory where the plugin's manual page shall be installed

3) Create a Makefile by issuing the following command

      ./configure

4) Compile the module with the following command line

      make build

5) Then copy the resulting binary mbc_plugin.so, the man page, the default config and example script to the corresponding directories
   This can be achieved using:

      make install

That's it.

Configuration
-------------
After the plugin library is installed and ready to be used, Dovecot's configuration needs to be adapted to make Dovecot use the plugin.

This is a 3-step process:

1) Copy the file mbc_script.sh.dist to mbc_script.sh (or any other file name that suits you) and add the script you would like to execute

2) Make Dovecot aware of the plugin.
   This happens by adding it to the corresponding mail_plugins-list (e.g. global/lmtp/lda/imap/...)
   Note, that dovecot-mbc depends on the notify plugin's notifications, so don't forget to enable it as well!

      mail_plugins = $mail_plugins notify mbc

3) Setting the plugin's configuration options.
   This is done in the new configuration file conf.d/90-mbc.conf.dist

   Copy it to conf.d/90-mbc.conf, provide the absolute path to the script you want to execute (see first step above) and you are set:

      plugin {
        mbc_script = /etc/dovecot/mbc_script.sh
      }
      
   You can turn on debugging (and its respective path) by the variables <code>"debug"</code> and <code>"logpath"</code>.
   Default log path is "/var/log/mail.log".

      debug = true
      logpath = /var/log/mail.log

Now restart your dovecot daemon and the script is executed, if a context which uses the plugin creates or renames a mailbox.

GIT repository structure
---------------------
dovecot-mbc's git repository consists of the following folders and files:
- configure - the binary, which will create the makefile
- Makefile.in - the template for the makefile, which is generated by ./configure
- README.md - the file you are currently looking at ;)
- conf/ - here you find the configuration files for the plugin
   - 90-mbc.conf - example configuration file
- contrib/ - here you find all the contributed files
   - configure.ac - the autoconf file (for any further developments)
   - mbc_script.sh.dist - example script file
   - src/ - here is some more contributed source code
      - notify-plugin.h - the notify's plugin header file (which is needed during compilation)
- man/ - here you can find the man pages
   - dovecot-mbc.1.in - template for the man page (which is created during compilation)
- src/ - the plugin's source code
   - mbc-plugin.c - the main source code
   - mbc-plugin.h - the header file
   - mbc-log.cpp - source code for log routine
   - mbc-log.h - log header

Special thanks
---------------------
Special thanks go to Peter Marschall <peter@adpm.de>.
Reading his github repository https://github.com/marschap/fetchmail_wakeup helped me a lot. Some of my work in this repository may be inspired by his plugin.
